DATA SCIENCE PROSPECTUS
EXPLORE Overview
EXPLORE is a next generation Learning Institution that teaches students the skills of the future. From Data Science to Data Engineering, from to Machine Learning to Deep Learning we deliver cutting edge courses to satisfy your hunger to learn. Our Programmes are built by an amazing Faculty - we employ some of the world’s most talented Scientists who have experience solving diﬃcult problems on a global stage.
Our philosophy is to teach our students how to solve problems in the real world. We emphasise teamwork, collaboration and working within constraints, under pressure, with deadlines while understanding context, audience and implementation challenges. We are not a theoretical institution (although we cover the theory) - we are a ‘practical, hands-on, roll-up-your-sleeves and get stuﬀ done’ kind of institution. As real-world Scientists who have delivered impact in the world of work we’re well positioned to deliver these skills.
EXPLORE launched during 2013 and since then has taught 1,000’s of students and solved many problems for businesses across multiple Industries across the world. We’re reinventing education and invite you to join us to change things for the better.
Why Data Science?
Four megatrends are fundamentally changing the shape of our world: 
1. Vast amounts of data are being generated every minute. 
2. The  processing  speed  of  our  machines  is  increasing exponentially.
3. We  now  have  cloud  providers  who  can  store  insane amounts of data for a few dollars. 
4. Powerful  open  source  algorithms  that  can  read,  write, translate and see are now available to everyone. 
Data Science is the skillset used to harness the power of these tectonic  shifts  in  our  world.  With  the  Data  Scientist’s  tool-kit almost any problem can now be solved.
It is no surprise that Data Scientists are one of the most highly paid and in demand skills of the 21st Century. In fact, the job ‘Data  Scientist’  was  rated  the  ‘sexiest  profession  of  the  21st Century’ by the Harvard Business Review.
Curriculum Overview
This course will provide students with the knowledge, skills and experience to get a job as a Data Scientist - which requires a mix of programming, statistical understanding and the ability to  apply  both  skills  in  new  and  challenging  domains.  The course will teach students to gather data, visualise data, apply statistical analysis to answer questions with that data and make their  insights  and  information  as  actionable  as  possible.  We cover the fundamentals of the Data Scientist toolkit as well as a broad set of machine learning algorithms. 
Fundamentals 
Data Science 101 2 weeks
Gathering Data 3 weeks
Analysing Data 4 weeks
Visualising Data 2 weeks
Communicating Insights 1 week
Machine Learning Classiﬁcation Techniques 4 weeks
Regression Techniques 4 weeks
Unsupervised Learning 4 weeks 
Module 1
Data Science 101
Learn about the process of solving problems with data 
What is covered in Module 1:
Analyse 
What is analysing? process?
Where does analyse ﬁt in the data science process?
Tools we use to analyse data
Gather 
What is gathering?
Where does gather ﬁt in the data science process?
Tools we use to gather data
Visualise 
What is visualising? 
Where does visualise ﬁt in the data science process?
Tools we use to visualise data
Communicate  
What is communicating? 
Where does communicate ﬁt in the data science process?
Tools we use to communicate data
Module 2
Analysing Data
Project: Create a report of the insights of the recent Cape Town water crisis
What is covered in Module 2:
Python
Programming Fundamentals
Set-up environments - local notebooks & cloud
Syntax, variables and expressions
Conditional statements,  and loops
Building functions
Data Structures 
Python data types
Lists, tuples, sets and dictionaries
Using Numpy and Pandas libraries
Store, retrieve  and transform data
Statistics
Probability Theory
Basics of probability theory
Experiments, outcomes and sample space
Calculating probability
Conditional Probability  
Independence in probability
Events that are conditional on one another
Calculating conditional probability
Module 3
Gathering Data
Project: Set-up and extract valuable information from the TMDB movie database
What is covered in Module 3:
SQL Server
Querying from the data
Retrieving records from a database
Specifying conditions for your queries
Joining data across multiple sources
Performing calculations on the data
Changing the data 
Add additional data to the database
Making changes to existing data
Making changes to the structure(schema) of the database
Statistics
Probability Theory
What is a probability distribution?
Discrete vs continuous distributions
Normal distribution
Set Theory 
What is set theory?
Venn diagrams
Unions and intersections
Module 4
Visualising Data
Project: Build a dashboard to tell a story of team and player performance of an IPL cricket team
What is covered in Module 4:
Power BI
Setting up the data
Loading data into Power BI
Linking datasets together with unique key
Create columns using DAX formulas
Create measures using DAX formulas
Visualising the data 
Create summary statistic cards
Create appropriate graphs
Using ﬁlters
Formatting visuals
Statistics
Sampling
What is sampling?
t-distributions
Conﬁdence intervals
Hypothesis Testing
Null hypothesis vs alternative hypothesis
Signiﬁcance levels
One-tailed & two-tailed tests
Module 5
Communicating Insights
Project: Build and deliver a presentation
What is covered in Module 5:
Problem Identiﬁcation 
Defining a problem
Problem identiﬁcation - ﬁnd out what is really needed
Setting up the correct problem statement
Articulate solution 
Producing relevant solutions - answer the question asked 
Actionable insights - recommendations should be actionable
Effective Communication
Visual aids
Structure of a slide deck
Creating ghost decks to plan presentation
What to include and not include on a slide
Presenting 
Body language when presenting
Presenting principles - what to say and how to say it
Module 6
Classiﬁcation Techniques
Project: Predict if someone will take out a personal loan or not
What is covered in Module 6:
Pre-processing and Model Building
Preparing data for modelling
Basics of Scikit Learn library in Python
Deﬁne features and labels
Train/test split
Encoding categorical features
Standardizing features
Steps to build a model 
Overview of classiﬁcation
Logistic regression models
Build and train models in python
Make predictions using trained model
Test model output - confusion matrix, classiﬁcation report
Classiﬁcation Algorithms
Algorithms for classification models
K nearest neighbors
Decision trees
Random forests
Support vector machines
Optimizing model performance
Optimizing model performance by tuning hyperparameters
Gridsearch techniques
Which models to use when
Module 7
Regression Techniques
Project: Using features of a house alone, predict the sale price
What is covered in Module 7:
Regression Algorithms
Steps to build a model
Overview of regression
Linear regression models
Train models and make predictions
Regularization techniques - Ridge, Lasso
Test model output - MSE, MAE, RMSE
Algorithms for regression models
K nearest neighbors
Decision trees
Random forests
Support vector machines
Optimizing model performance by tuning hyperparameters
Dimensionality Reduction
Feature selection
Determining signiﬁcant features - linear and non-linear methods
Variance Thresholds to drop features
Correlations Thresholds
Features extraction
Principal component analysis
Linear discriminant analysis
Interpreting extracted features and transforming them back
Module 8
Unsupervised Learning
Project: Cluster customer reviews into themes
What is covered in Module 8:
Natural Language Processing
Overview of NLP
Overview of NLTK library in python - for NLP
Removing punctuation and symbols
Tokenizing text
Stopwords and removing them
Lemmatization of words 
Analysing text
Bag of words
Sentiment analysis
Clustering
Hard and Hierarchical Clustering
What is clustering?
Various forms of clustering - hard, hierarchical, soft
K-Means Clustering
Hierarchical Clustering
Soft Clustering 
Gaussian Mixture Models
LDE clustering of text
Labelling data using cluster output
EXPLORE Philosophy: 
Solving problems in the real world
At EXPLORE we focus on building our student’s ability to solve problems in the real world. Building things that work and make a difference is hard - that’s what we teach. 
We’re not a traditional learning institution that spends weeks teaching  matrix  multiplication  on  a  whiteboard  (although solution-orientated  institution  that  teaches  our  students  to work  in  teams,  under  pressure,  with  deadlines  while understanding context, constraints and the audience. 
Our courses are typically broken into Sprints where we teach a core set of concepts within the framework of solving a problem in a team with a tight deadline.
Students cycle from Sprint to Sprint solving different problems in  different  teams  as  they  build  this  core  muscle  over  the course.
Contact Information
For any admissions related enquiries mail us on: 
admission@explore-ai.net
For any general enquiries mail us on: 
general@explore-ai.net 
Visit: www.explore-datascience.net 
 