DATA SCIENCE for EXECUTIVES PROSPECTUS
EXPLORE Overview
EXPLORE is a next generation Learning Institution that teaches students the skills of the future. From Data Science to Data Engineering, from to Machine Learning to Deep Learning we deliver cutting edge courses to satisfy your hunger to learn. Our Programmes are built by an amazing Faculty - we employ some of the world’s most talented Scientists who have experience solving diﬃcult problems on a global stage.
Our philosophy is to teach our students how to solve problems in the real world. We emphasise teamwork, collaboration and working within constraints, under pressure, with deadlines while understanding context, audience and implementation challenges. We are not a theoretical institution (although we cover the theory) - we are a ‘practical, hands-on, roll-up-your-sleeves and get stuﬀ done’ kind of institution. As real-world Scientists who have delivered impact in the world of work we’re well positioned to deliver these skills.
EXPLORE launched during 2013 and since then has taught 1,000’s of students and solved many problems for businesses across multiple Industries across the world. We’re reinventing education and invite you to join us to change things for the better.
Why Data Science?
Four megatrends are fundamentally changing the shape of our world: 
1. Vast amounts of data are being generated every minute. 
2. The  processing  speed  of  our  machines  is  increasing exponentially.
3. We  now  have  cloud  providers  who  can  store  insane amounts of data for a few dollars. 
4. Powerful  open  source  algorithms  that  can  read,  write, translate and see are now available to everyone. 
Data Science is the skillset used to harness the power of these tectonic  shifts  in  our  world.  With  the  Data  Scientist’s  tool-kit almost any problem can now be solved.
It is no surprise that Data Scientists are one of the most highly paid and in demand skills of the 21st Century. In fact, the job ‘Data  Scientist’  was  rated  the  ‘sexiest  profession  of  the  21st Century’ by the Harvard Business Review.
Curriculum Overview
This course will help you - a business leader or executive - to harness  the  data  likely  already  present  in  your  organisation, utilise  insights  from  technical  analytics  teams  to  inform  the direction of your business, and deploy the right technical skills in order to succeed as a data-driven company.
Duration: 8 weeks 
Time Per Day: 1.5 hours
Course Difficulty: Intermediate
Pre-Requisite Skills: None; Leadership experience beneﬁcial
Introduction 
What is Data Science? Principles & Trends 2 weeks
Steering the Ship Data-Driven Decision-Making 3 weeks
Attitude & Aptitude Deploying the Right Skills 3 weeks
Module 1
What is Data Science?
An introduction to the principles, trends, terminology and common practices of data science.
What is covered in Module 1:
Fundamentals
Introduction
Industry terminology
The EXPLORE data science framework
Tools of the trade
A brief history of data science
State of Data Science
Current global trends
Data science in action worldwide
Use Cases
Problem statement for the rest of the course
Introducing the dataset
Module 2
Data-Driven Decision-Making
Project: Deliver a report summarising the state of data in your organisation, with clear problems identiﬁed and proposed solutions.
What is covered in Module 2:
Data Identiﬁcation
Fundamentals
Where is your data stored?
How much is there of it?
What type of data is it?
Business Alignment
Objectives
What can be improved with data?
Deﬁning KPIs and goals
Collecting the right data
Measuring Success
Performance
Understanding predictive models
Statistical signiﬁcance and hypothesis testing
Classiﬁcation vs. regression
Module 3
Deploying the Right Skills
Project: Deliver a report stating a clear data-driven direction for your business, including potential hires and technology deployments.
What is covered in Module 3:
People
Aptitude
Identifying the skills you have and those you need
Building a data science/analytics team
Technology
Hardware
Cloud providers
Pipelines: gathering, transforming, storing data
Software
The importance of reporting and dashboards
Data visualisation software
Choosing types of databases and programming languages
Dev Ops
AGILE development practices
Critical resources
Assigning responsibility appropriately
EXPLORE Philosophy: 
Solving problems in the real world
At EXPLORE we focus on building our student’s ability to solve problems in the real world. Building things that work and make a difference is hard - that’s what we teach. 
We’re not a traditional learning institution that spends weeks teaching  matrix  multiplication  on  a  whiteboard  (although solution-orientated  institution  that  teaches  our  students  to work  in  teams,  under  pressure,  with  deadlines  while understanding context, constraints and the audience. 
Our courses are typically broken into Sprints where we teach a core set of concepts within the framework of solving a problem in a team with a tight deadline.
Students cycle from Sprint to Sprint solving different problems in  different  teams  as  they  build  this  core  muscle  over  the course.
Contact Information
For any admissions related enquiries mail us on: 
admission@explore-ai.net
For any general enquiries mail us on: 
general@explore-ai.net 
Visit: www.explore-datascience.net 
 