How to structure your Data Science Capability
What makes sense for you?
Managing the organisation’s data function
Where to house your Data Science capability involves several key design decisions. 
Companies typically pursue one of four models:
Business unit led with central support
If the business units in the organization manage their own data sets and have internal analytics capabilities, they can run their own analytics functions with limited coordination.
Business unit led
When the business units are analytically self-sufﬁcient but there are many BU’s it often makes sense to leverage the support of a central capability.
Center of Excellence 
An independent centre oversees the company’s Data efforts. Units pursue initiatives under the CoE’s guidance and coordination.
Fully centralized
A Corporate Function is set up and takes direct responsibility for identifying, prioritizing and delivering all Data initiatives.
It is important to note that IT does not own any of the models above. While IT often plays a critical role in providing and maintaining the infrastructure and tools required to execute the Analytics initiatives, it is critical to note that business runs and owns the functions. So which model is best? That depends mainly on:
1. EXISTING ANALYTICS CAPABILITIES
Companies with existing deep analytics capabilities can rely on a generally decentralized approach but this is an exception to the rule from what we’ve seen.
2. STRATEGIC AMBITION
Companies that are fully data-driven organisations, need to maintain talent and focus close to the most important business problems - which is most suited to a centralized approach. 
For any organisation, the choice of structure is not ﬁxed for the long-term, but may change  many  times  as  the  analytics  maturity  and  ambition  of  the  company evolves. 
From our experience many companies ﬁnd that a Centre of Excellence has the 
1. A Centre of Excellence enables BU’s to share learnings and best practice. 
2. It allows the business to build a large  set of data lakes that usually allows insights that would otherwise not have been possible. 
3. The Centre of Excellence enables synergies and scale benefits and is often the best mechanism for an organisation to accelerate its Data Science journey.
Setting up a Centre of Excellence
This is not a quick or easy task. It requires strong analytics leadership as well as an A-Team of Data Scientists, Engineers, Analysts and Analytics Translators. Setting up a central unit like this typically takes 12-18 months and, to make a success of it, requires bold leadership that steps on toes and upsets the status quo.
Beyond the center of excellence (COE), employees at all levels need to be trained.
Senior Leaders 
Business leaders of a transformation or a use-case implementation
Managers
Business users (ie, mid-level managers) of  the outputs of analytics models and insights
Analytics Specialists 
Design and build analytics models Iterate/reﬁne models based on business and user
Analytics Translators
Collaborate with the business to understand the need and can guide analytics design to meet 
Our Recommendations
Choose the structure that makes the most sense for your current business taking into account your analytics maturity and strategic ambition. Re-evaluate this decision frequently to re-assess the role of Data Science in the organisation and what structure best delivers the outcomes you require.
Setting up a Centre of Excellence has many benefits, but requires the coordination and commitment of the entire organisation, something which takes extensive time and effort. 
When no single structure makes sense for an organisation, consider a hybrid model e.g. managing outsourced and remote talent vs full-time data resources.
ABOUT EXPLORE
EXPLORE is a next generation learning institution on a mission to deliver Digital Skills at scale. It has worked with many Blue Chips, both locally and globally, helping them transform to become more Data-Driven and Insights-led.
Our services include:
BUILDING A PIPELINE OF DATA TALENT FOR YOUR ORGANIZATION 
EXPLORE teaches a range of courses that include Data Science, Data Analytics, Data Engineering and Data Translation where you can sponsor the next generation of digital talent.
UPSKILLING YOUR CURRENT WORKFORCE
We have a range of short and long courses for your workforce so that they are ready to reset their skill-sets and turbo-charge their careers into the Digital Age.
PLACING SCARCE DIGITAL SKILLS INTO YOUR BUSINESS
We have access to a long list of talented skills that we can match to your company’s needs to best set you up for success.
PRODUCTS AND SERVICES
We have some of the best Scientists around who have decades of experience solving problems, both locally and globally. Currently we’re working for Blue Chips in South Africa and across the UK in the Utulities and Financial Services industries.
EXPLORE-DIGITAL.NET
 