Becoming an Insights-Led Organisation
Restarting the journey
The Sexiest Career in the World
Ever since The Harvard Business Review published that ‘Data Science is the Sexiest Career of the 21st Century’, executives around the world have had a tough time of it. Boards, CEOs and Analytics Heads have felt pressure to build ‘Data-Driven’ and ‘Insights-Led’ organisations.
Although organisations have been ‘doing advanced analytics’ for decades many have been struggling to earn a real, tangible return on their data efforts proportional to the hype. Boards, CEOs and Investors are becoming impatient as the promise of the latest advances do not seem to be landing in the organisation.
Our experience is that organisations are still battling to capture the signiﬁcant beneﬁts that Data Science has to offer. We have found that there is not yet a common language or a standard set of methodologies, processes and approaches to navigate this fast-moving ﬁeld.
Today an organisation’s reﬂex is to hire a team of Data Scientists and hope that the magic will ﬂow. This, however, is not how the story unfolds. What happens is usually somewhat different: a company hires an expensive team of Data Scientists who build complex models that no-one really understands and that never make it into production. Circumspection sets in and soon the C-Suite views the Data Science effort as yet another fad next to a long list of failed initiatives.
This paper serves to share how we think an Organisation can (re)start its journey to being an Insights-Led organisation.  
Better, faster, cheaper
We look at an organization as a combination of decisions that are being made. Typically there are thousands of decisions being made every day. These decisions drive Enterprise Value. Some decisions are incredibly important and are signiﬁcant levers of value. For example, to whom a bank gives credit and at what interest rate is a critical decision. How well this decision is made can fundamentally impact the value of the enterprise.
WE MAINTAIN THAT EVERY DECISION A BUSINESS MAKES IS DELIVERED
By a combination of humans and machines
Using a body of evidence and intuition
To optimise for a particular outcome
Every one of these decisions can improve significantly - a combination of better, faster and/or cheaper – by using the latest advances in Data Science.
The job of the organisation is to agree on the big decisions and mobilise Data teams around making those decisions better, faster and/or cheaper.
To start the Data Science journey the Executive team must work together to:
1. Articulate the Opportunity Space. The Executive team must generate a set of Use Cases across the business where they think signiﬁcant value could be unlocked.
2. Evaluate the Opportunities. A consistent framework for evaluating each opportunity must be agreed and then each Use Case evaluated using the chosen framework. From here a prioritisation process can begin.
3. Prioritise the Opportunities. Once there is a common language for discussing the Opportunities the team can start ﬁghting for what to do when. The process is often a battle. Executives disagree. Emotions run high. This process is not easy.
4. Allocate resources accordingly. After the prioritised list has been agreed the team must allocate resources to deliver the opportunities. Often internal resources are insufﬁcient to get everything done. The Executive should consider using external suppliers when it is sensible to do so - often external solutions will be better positioned than your internal teams to deliver value. Be open to that.
5. Deliver value. After the long journey of agreeing who does what when, the hard work starts. The business must execute on the plans it has set. We propose that agile, multi-disciplined Data teams contract with business with signed-off scorecards, business sponsors and check-points to ensure delivery stays on track.
Having spent time with many Executive Teams we propose the process as set out above. We include some of the tools and frameworks that we ﬁnd work well to structure and guide the process below. We give some real-world examples to give the process some colour.
1. ARTICULATE THE OPPORTUNITY SPACE
Step 1: Each Executive works with his/her teams to uncover the big decisions that drive value in their area. For a Marketing Executive this may be ‘Do I market on television or via Social Media?’ and ‘What is the best time to air my radio advertisements?’. For an Operations Executive it may be ‘Where do I build my next branch?’ and ‘How do I reduce fraudulent claims?’
Step 2: Each Executive must then prioritise the Top 5-7 Decisions in each of their areas. Often it is obvious what the big ticket items are and the team aligns quickly on the big decisions that they need help on. Other times it may not be clear and teams disagree.
Step 3: Once the Top 5-7 Decisions have been agreed it is necessary to articulate each as a Problem Statement. This task, which sounds simple, is difficult and critical to get right. The framing of the Problem Statement drives the problem-solving process and, if carelessly phrased, can lead teams down blind alleys.
An  example  of  a  good  Problem  Statement:  ‘Should  we  build  a  branch  in suburb X, and, if so, what size investment is optimal?’ An example of a poor 
Problem Statement: ‘Where should I build a bank branch?’
Step 4: The entire Executive then meet as a group. Each bring their Problem Statements to the table. These Problem Statements are then put down onto a single page for the team to have a single view of the Opportunity Space available to them.
NEXT PAGE IS AN EXAMPLE OF A TYPICAL BANK’S OPPORTUNITY SPACE
The next task is then to evaluate each opportunity in a consistent manner so that the business can prioritise what to do when.
2. EVALUATE THE OPPORTUNITIES
Now that the Executive has a set of opportunities to consider what follows is the difﬁcult task of deciding what opportunity to do when. All opportunities are not made equal. Some are more difﬁcult than others. Some are ten times more valuable than the rest. Some require skills that the organization do not have.
The Executive must align by scoring a number of criteria for each Opportunity that can be used to prioritise the list.
BELOW IS AN EXAMPLE THE CRITERIA THAT WE HAVE USED ACROSS A NUMBER OF ORGANISATIONS
Problem Statement: Clear articulation of Problem to Solve
Value to Unlock: Clear Valuation of Opportunity (NPV)
Difﬁculty: Ease of Implementation
KPI(s): KPIs to Track
Resource Required: People / Training Tools Investment
Approach: How will Problem be Approached? What methodologies used?
Time To Complete: Estimate of time to complete?
Milestones: Key Milestones Key Go / No go Checkpoints
3. PRIORITISE THE OPPORTUNITIES
Once the opportunities have been set and evaluated it is the difﬁcult task of the team to agree the prioritised list. Part art, part science, this is often a colourful process where each team member will ﬁght for the Use Case(s) that they have put forward. 
To weight the factors selected in the previous step and then generate a ‘scientific answer’ to what the priorities should be
Have an afternoon workshop where the team goes through the Opportunities and then votes (eg. using Google Forms) for their Top 5 Use Cases
To agree a Decision Maker (eg. CEO) who has the ﬁnal say at the end of the process
4. ALLOCATING RESOURCES ACCORDINGLY
Once the team has a Top 5 or Top 10 set of Use Cases it is then time for the business to allocate resources. From our experience there will always be 10X more Use Cases than resources and, unfortunately, many of the Use Cases will be left on the shelf while the Internal Data Science capability begin their journey to build business value.
From our experience a Scrum Team of 3-5 dedicated resources to deliver each Opportunity works well, with this number scaling up or down depending on the nature and difﬁculty of the work. Principles that we have found to work are:
Small autonomous teams are ideal
Teams should work in an agile way 
User feeback is critical to direct teams towards business value
The teams should integrate into the business - an IT and business representative should be on the team to ensure that the work is practical, relevant and can be implemented
A range of skills - covering Consulting, Data Science, Data Engineering, Data Visualisation, System Integration, Data Management and Software Development are usually required to deliver value 
Given the Supply/Demand gap to deliver on the Opportunities it is often sensible to consider external Data Science teams to deliver some of the Use Cases. This makes sense when the following holds true:
The value that can be unlocked is so great it does not make sense to wait for Internal teams
External teams have solved the problem before and can quickly implement the solution
External teams have skills that the Internal Teams do not have (eg. Experts at Image Classiﬁcation and Anomaly Detection to check for Claims Fraud on PDF-ed Invoices)
There is no sensitive internal data involved so issues such as privacy, GDPR and POPI are not relevant
BELOW IS AN EXAMPLE OF A PRIORITISED LIST OF USE CASES WITH INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL TEAMS ASSIGNED
Improving Contactability
Improve Credit Scoring
Who to Hire / Fire
Fraud Detection
Improving Customer Service
Improving Digital Marketing
3. DELIVER VALUE
Once the Opportunities have been allocated teams the real fun starts. To keep teams honest we have found that a scorecard should be set at the outset of each Use Case to keep the team both mindful of the problem they’re trying to solve and accountable to the work they’re doing.
To weight the factors selected in the previous step and then generate a ‘scientific answer’ to what the priorities should be
Have an afternoon workshop where the team goes through the Opportunities and then votes (eg. using Google Forms) for their Top 5 Use Cases
To agree a Decision Maker (eg. CEO) who has the ﬁnal say at the end of the process
In addition to this we have believe that a Business Sponsor should be allocated to each team with fortnightly check-ins and monthly SteerCos. The team should work in an agile manner using Sprints, Daily Scrums and back-logs to manage the outcomes.
ABOUT EXPLORE
EXPLORE is a next generation learning institution on a mission to deliver Digital Skills at scale. It has worked with many Blue Chips, both locally and globally, helping them transform to become more Data-Driven and Insights-led.
Our services include:
BUILDING A PIPELINE OF DATA TALENT FOR YOUR ORGANIZATION 
EXPLORE teaches a range of courses that include Data Science, Data Analytics, Data Engineering and Data Translation where you can sponsor the next generation of digital talent.
UPSKILLING YOUR CURRENT WORKFORCE
We have a range of short and long courses for your workforce so that they are ready to reset their skill-sets and turbo-charge their careers into the Digital Age.
PLACING SCARCE DIGITAL SKILLS INTO YOUR BUSINESS
We have access to a long list of talented skills that we can match to your company’s needs to best set you up for success.
PRODUCTS AND SERVICES
We have some of the best Scientists around who have decades of experience solving problems, both locally and globally. Currently we’re working for Blue Chips in South Africa and across the UK in the Utulities and Financial Services industries.
EXPLORE-DIGITAL.NET
 