The Future of Learning and Development
Driving core strategic value
4IR: Not for the feint-hearted
Learning and Development functions need to evolve quickly as the Fourth Industrial Revolution (4IR) unfolds at a rapid pace. Half of the jobs today will not be around in 5 years and half of tomorrow’s jobs do not exist yet. Machines are becoming more capable and replacing humans at increasing speeds leaving organisations playing catch up to acquire, upskill and reskill an ever changing employee base that works alongside these machines.
Factors shaping the future of learning technology:
DIGITAL LEARNING
MOBILE LEARNING
PEER-TO-PEER LEARNING
PROJECT-BASED LEARNING
EXPERIENTIAL LEARNING
PERSONALIZED LEARNING
We are fast moving to a world of complex digital skills, cross-functional teams, remote working and agile, project-based delivery structures ﬁlled with young, digital natives who have different ambitions than the traditional workforce.
In South Africa there is the additional complexity of Employment Equity, anemic economic growth and the BBBEE Scorecard to worry about. Added to this are a set of outdated accredited courses that teach skills that are redundant in our Digital Age. Yet companies still spend money on these to score the points they need for their BBBEE Scorecard.
How do Learning and Development Executives earn their keep in this fast-moving environment? 
The Challenge
EXPLORE was given the task to build a Data Science Academy for a large Telecommunications organisation that wanted to drive scarce Digital Skills into its business as well as the broader South African economy. The project included the requirement to maximise BBBEE Skills Development points.
Maximising BBBEE Skills Development points
Driving scarce Digital Skills into its business 
Driving these scarce skills into the broader South African economy
Delivering a clear RoI on its investment
The Solution
EXPLORE built a ﬁrst of its kind Data Science Programme, recruited 100 smart youngsters and delivered a practical year-long programme. The design principles of  this  intervention  were  to  teach  critical  digital  skills  that  would  quickly  be absorbed by an economy that urgently needs them.
Details of the programme are included below:
BUILD A WORLD-CLASS DATA SCIENCE PROGRAMME
EXPLORE built a bespoke Data Science Programme for the client. The programme was built by top local academics (ex Head of Actuarial Science UCT) and practitioners (ex Chief Actuary Nedbank) that delivered the latest cutting edge Data Science tools, techniques and platforms to students. 
RECRUIT THE BEST 
EXPLORE recruited 100 learners from around the country. These students were a diverse  mix  of  students  from  different  backgrounds,  qualiﬁcations,  ages  and socio-economic upbringings. All had to pass through EXPLORE’s tough 3-step recruitment process. Over 10,000 students applied. Only 100 were granted scholarships. The group were 98% representative of South Africa’s population.
TEACH REAL-WORLD PROBLEM SOLVING
EXPLORE taught students practical problem solving skills. The curriculum was a series of Sprints where students were put into teams to solve problems with deadlines. We found that the best way to teach complex topics is through the practical application of them.
WORKING WITH THE CLIENT ON THEIR PROJECTS
The second half of the academic calendar involved teams being set up to solve the client’s actual problems. Real problems were set up with actual client data and sponsors in place to manage and direct the problem solving process.
Student Results
The results of the year long programme were compelling. Retention, graduation, placement and performance rates were high. Client satisfaction was also high across project delivery, student etiquette and EXPLORE delivery.
95% Graduated
R360,000 Average Starting Salary
93% Placed
45 Days on average to get placed
9/10 Employer NPS of 9/10
27% In the Financial Services Industry
Beneﬁts
The beneﬁts for the client were signiﬁcant. The project delivered well across 4 key dimensions having a signiﬁcant return on the investment.
For 18M Investment
1 ~10 Maximum BBBEE Points Points
2 ~R40M - R50M Consulting Value Solutions
3 30 Top Talent Hired Talent
4 R4M Rebates Refund
The business ended the year as a BBBEE Level 1 Provider, putting out offers to hire 30 of the Data Scientists (with no recruitment fee payable) and roughly R50M in consulting revenue back to the business from the students’ projects!
Our Recommendation
Too often L&D spend is an expense item on the Income Statement where money is spent exactly how it was spent 10 years ago. Instead we think L&D Executives should be thinking about L&D spend differently:
As a strategic investment in growing the talent pool of the business
As a means to build out the digital talent it needs to survive and thrive in the Digital Age
As an investment that has a measurable RoI
As an initiative that is core to the business 
As a recruitment strategy to get the best young (and often hidden) talent into the business
As a brand building exercise 
ABOUT EXPLORE
EXPLORE is a next generation learning institution on a mission to deliver Digital Skills at scale. It has worked with many Blue Chips, both locally and globally, helping them transform to become more Data-Driven and Insights-led.
Our services include:
BUILDING A PIPELINE OF DATA TALENT FOR YOUR ORGANIZATION 
EXPLORE teaches a range of courses that include Data Science, Data Analytics, Data Engineering and Data Translation where you can sponsor the next generation of digital talent.
UPSKILLING YOUR CURRENT WORKFORCE
We have a range of short and long courses for your workforce so that they are ready to reset their skill-sets and turbo-charge their careers into the Digital Age.
PLACING SCARCE DIGITAL SKILLS INTO YOUR BUSINESS
We have access to a long list of talented skills that we can match to your company’s needs to best set you up for success.
PRODUCTS AND SERVICES
We have some of the best Scientists around who have decades of experience solving problems, both locally and globally. Currently we’re working for Blue Chips in South Africa and across the UK in the Utulities and Financial Services industries.
EXPLORE-DIGITAL.NET