MACHINE LEARNING PROSPECTUS
EXPLORE Overview
EXPLORE is a next generation Learning Institution  that  teaches  students  the skills of the future. From Data Science to Data Engineering to Machine Learning to  Deep  Learning  we  deliver  cutting edge courses to satisfy your hunger to learn. Our Programmes are built by an amazing Faculty -  we employ some of the world’s most talented Scientists who have experience solving difﬁcult problems on a global stage. 
Our philosophy is to teach our students how to solve problems in the real world. We emphasise team-work, collaboration and working  within  constraints,  under  pressure,  with  deadlines while  understanding  context,  audience  and  implementation challenges. We are not a theoretical institution (although we cover  the  theory)  -  we  are  a  ‘practical,  hands-on, roll-up-your-sleeves and get stuff done’ kind of institution. As real-world Scientists who have delivered impact in the world of work we’re well positioned to deliver these skills. 
EXPLORE  launched  during  2013  and  since  then  has  taught 1,000’s of students and solved many problems for businesses across multiple Industries across the world. We’re reinventing education and invite you to join us to change things for the better.
Why Machine Learning?
Four megatrends are fundamentally changing the shape of our 
world: 
1. Vast amounts of data are being generated every minute. 
2. The  processing  speed  of  our  machines  is  increasing exponentially.
3. We  now  have  cloud  providers  who  can  store  insane amounts of data for a few dollars. 
4. Powerful  open  source  algorithms  that  can  read,  write, translate and see are now available to everyone. 
All of these things above mean that it’s becoming easier and quicker  to  produce  models  that  can  analyze  bigger/more complex data and deliver more accurate results – even on a very large scale. By building prediction models a business has a better  chance  of  identifying  proﬁtable  opportunities  –  or avoiding unknown risks.
Curriculum Overview
The course will start by covering the basics of programming in python  -  building  functions  to  automate  analysis.  After  the foundations have been set, participants will master the model building process and the various machine learning algorithms to use as well as exploring techniques such as clustering and natural language processing. In the ﬁnal phase participants will dive  deeper  into  the  more  complex  machine  learning techniques - deep learning, where they will cover all the various neural networks.
Programming
Python Fundamentals 3 weeks
Python Data Structures 3 weeks
Machine Learning 
Classiﬁcation Techniques 4 weeks
Regression Techniques 4 weeks
Unsupervised Learning 4 weeks
Deep Learning 4 weeks 
Module 1
Python Fundamentals
Project: Build a ﬁnancial calculator
What is covered in Module 1:
Python Programming Basics
Basic Concepts
What is programming
Installing Jupyter environment
Pseudo code and debugging concepts
Interactive vs scripting mode
Variables, Expressions and Statements
Print statements
Working with primitive data types - variables, strings, integers, ﬂoating points, booleans
Math functions and relational operators
Importing modules
Logic and Functions
Working with Logic
Conditional statements - IF and ELSE IF
Working with lists 
For loops and while loops
Break | Continue principles
Writing Functions
How functions work - basic syntax
Creating and working with functions
Parameters in functions
Local and global variables
Module 2
Python Data Structures
Project:  Build functions to select the most optimal football team
What is covered in Module 2:
Data Types
Working with Basic Structures
What is a String?
What is a Number?
What is a Boolean?
Working with Strings, Numbers, Booleans
Working with Lists and Tuples
Lists and Tuples Semantics
Lists and Tuples Operations
Working with Comparisons
Working with Statements
Dataframes and using Libraries
Working with Sets and Dictionaries
Sets and Dictionaries Semantics
Sets and Dictionaries  Operations
Working with Comparisons
Working with Statements
Working with Data Sets
Importing Data - using Numpy and Pandas libraries
Working with Data Frames
Retrieving and Storing Data
Transforming Data
Module 3
Classiﬁcation Techniques
Project: Predict if someone will take out a personal loan or not
What is covered in Module 3:
Pre-processing and Model Building
Preparing data for modelling
Basics of Scikit Learn library in Python
Deﬁne features and labels
Train/test split
Encoding categorical features
Standardizing features
Steps to build a model
Overview of classiﬁcation
Logistic regression models
Build and train models in python
Make predictions using trained model
Test model output - confusion matrix, classiﬁcation report
Classiﬁcation Algorithms
Algorithms for classification models 
K nearest neighbors
Decision trees
Random forests
Support vector machines
Optimizing model performance 
Optimizing model performance by tuning hyperparameters
Gridsearch techniques
Which models to use when
Module 4
Regression Techniques
Project: Using features of a house alone, predict the sale price
What is covered in Module 4:
Regression Algorithms
Steps to build a model
Overview of regression
Linear regression models
Train models and make predictions
Regularization techniques - Ridge, Lasso
Test model output - MSE, MAE, RMSE
Algorithms for regression models
K nearest neighbors
Decision trees
Random forests
Support vector machines
Optimizing model performance by tuning hyperparameters
Dimensionality Reduction
Feature selection
Determining signiﬁcant features - linear and non-linear methods
Variance Thresholds to drop features
Correlations Thresholds
Features extraction 
Principal component analysis
Linear discriminant analysis
Interpreting extracted features and transforming them back
Module 5
Unsupervised Learning
Project: Cluster customer reviews into themes
What is covered in Module 5:
Natural Language Processing
Overview of NLP
Overview of NLTK library in python - for NLP
Removing punctuation and symbols
Tokenizing text
Stopwords and removing them 
Analysing text 
Lemmatization of words 
Bag of words
Sentiment analysis
Clustering
Hard and Hierarchical Clustering
What is clustering?
Various forms of clustering - hard, hierarchical, soft
K-Means Clustering
Hierarchical Clustering
Soft Clustering
Gaussian Mixture Models
LDE clustering of text
Labelling data using cluster output
Module 6
Deep Learning
Project: Predict the characters present in a handwritten image
What is covered in Module 6:
Artiﬁcial neural Network
How a Neural Network works
Overview of a neuron
Structure of a neural network
Backpropagation and gradient descent
Learning rate and batch sizes when training a neural network
Building and using ANN’s
Building classiﬁcation / regression ANN models in keras
Make predictions using ANN and test model output
Tuning hyperparameters (learning rate, batch size, nodes in each layer)
Other Neural Networks
Building and using CNN’s
Building classiﬁcation / regression CNN models in keras
Make predictions using CNN and test model output
Tuning hyperparameters
Building and using RNN’s
Building classiﬁcation / regression RNN models in keras
Make predictions using RNN and test model output
Tuning hyperparameters
EXPLORE Philosophy: 
Solving problems in the real world
At EXPLORE we focus on building our student’s ability to solve problems in the real world. Building things that work and make a difference is hard - that’s what we teach. 
We’re not a traditional learning institution that spends weeks teaching  matrix  multiplication  on  a  whiteboard  (although understanding  that  is  useful)  -  we’re  a  practical, solution-orientated  institution  that  teaches  our  students  to work  in  teams,  under  pressure,  with  deadlines  while understanding context, constraints and the audience. 
Our courses are typically broken into Sprints where we teach a core set of concepts within the framework of solving a problem in a team with a tight deadline.
Students cycle from Sprint to Sprint solving different problems in  different  teams  as  they  build  this  core  muscle  over  the course.
Contact Information
For any admissions related enquiries mail us on: 
admission@explore-ai.net
For any general enquiries mail us on: 
general@explore-ai.net 
Visit: www.explore-datascience.net 
 