Data Maturity
Where are you on your journey?
The Road to Excellence
The journey to becoming an end-to-end data-centric organisation that makes quality data-driven decisions at high velocity is difﬁcult and long. Many organisational habits and reﬂexes need to die to get there. Nothing short of a total transformation of the culture, people and processes are required. Like any transformation, the process is slow and painful.
Maturity is much more than having the best Data Scientists who build the best models. That is the easiest part of the journey. The difﬁcult part is mobilising and transforming the entire organisation to behave entirely differently to how they behaved before.
In this paper we share how we view an organisation’s Data Maturity and what are the behaviours, practices and methodologies that indicate where an organisation sits on the maturity curve.
VISUALISATION, COMMUNICATION AND IMPLEMENTATION
AGILITY, CULTURE AND ORGANISATIONAL IMPACT
ANALYTICS, TOOLS AND TALENT
DATA, DISCOVERABILITY AND INFRASTRUCTURE
STANDARDS, STRUCTURES AND BEST PRACTICE CODES1
Five Key Dimensions  
We think there are ﬁve dimensions to be mindful of during the journey. These are:
1. STANDARDS, STRUCTURES AND BEST PRACTICE CODES
This is the boring but important part. Organisations are big places that often stretch across multiple countries, business units and divisions. To enable solutions to scale at speed there must be consistent standards and practices in place so that different teams can work seamlessly together. 
Often a Centre of Excellence needs to be put in place to drive this agenda. This Centre will be in charge of setting standards, reviewing code and monitoring performance of Production models. They are also sometimes in charge of solving some of the big problems or building some of the core models that can be rolled out.
The work is difﬁcult and thankless: setting up the various frameworks, methodologies, Committees and best-practice guidelines to ensure consistency, excellence and minimum standards is not easy. These best practices need to be a living document and change as the technology landscape changes. Not many organisations get this right as this work is at the back of the queue for the Data Science community (who would rather be writing code than writing documents).
Unfortunately, we also ﬁnd the inevitable politics when a Centre of Excellence is 
2. DATA, DISCOVERABILITY AND INFRASTRUCTURE
Without a solid data foundation an organisation cannot get very far on its journey. It surprises us how many organisations trip up at this starting point. Although there has been decades of investment in data warehouses and large enterprise data  solutions,  many  organisations  have  data  environments  that  are  poorly deﬁned with missing tables, dictionaries and patchy governance.
Data governance has received signiﬁcant attention from all the companies we’ve worked with. Efforts to drive availability, security, consistency and integrity are set at a Board level and taken very seriously. Yet, despite this, the data environment often requires lots of work to get it to a point where the Data Science capability can begin. 
Add to this the new world of blending structured and unstructured data in the cloud within data lakes and we ﬁnd that companies have large gaps to ﬁll in this area. 
What makes it even more difﬁcult is the numerous pieces of data legislation emerging that prohibit the sharing, consumption and use of data. This often leaves companies paralysed with fear, leaving many business decisions to Compliance Departments who naturally will say “No” as a reﬂex. 
3. ANALYTICS, TOOLS AND TALENT
We ﬁnd you can tell a lot about a company’s maturity by spending an hour with a few of their Analysts. The tools they use, the qualiﬁcations they have and the types of models they use reveals a lot.
A sure sign that there is some work to do are a team that last studied 5+ years ago and largely work on Excel and SQL. Another sign that there are some problems is when analysts are unable to install open source software (eg Python) as this is a 3-month IT request.
With the exponential advances in machine learning algorithms, cloud computing and open source technologies we love it when we see agile teams of Scientists who are using the latest technology and continuously learning. This is quite rare in large organisations but quite common in nimble start-ups.
4. AGILITY, CULTURE AND ORGANISATIONAL IMPACT
Although subjective and hard to measure these items are some of the most important. Without  the  right  culture  across  the  organisation  Data  efforts  are doomed to fail from the start. What is needed is support from the CEO downwards where data-driven decisions are non-negotiable at every level.
What we love to see are small autonomous teams set up to solve big, thorny problems. Organisations that give smart creative teams the space and freedom to solve problems are the ones that make the fastest progress. We also ﬁnd that organisations that have an appetite to experiment and rapidly test the latest advances in an agile way are the ones that capture the most value. 
What works is companies that gives smart creative digital teams the space and freedom to solve problems using new methods that have not been tried before.
5. VISUALISATION, COMMUNICATION AND IMPLEMENTATION
Actually deriving real business value from your Analytics efforts is an art unto itself and the difﬁculty under-estimated. Moving from neat PowerPoint presentations to production-ready models that the front-line uses is not a trivial task.
To get this right entails an organisational muscle that most do not have: the ability to build practical solutions that non-technical stakeholders understand and that can be implemented amid  the messiness of the current IT systems. Once this is achieved the even harder task of change management across the organisation is required.
Only mature organisations continuously roll out Data Science solutions into production that improve decision making that business adopts as a matter of course.
EXPLORE Maturity Matrix
Below is a matrix we use to help us assess the maturity of an organization with the various levels set out to see:
To assess the maturity we typically spend a week in the organisation interviewing various Executives across the organisation as well as key role players in the Data teams. We score the organisation across the 5 Dimensions (15 Areas) above and end with a scorecard that assesses the company across the matrix.
Once we have completed the EXPLORE Maturity Matrix we sit with business and 
Their ‘centre of gravity’ where they sit across the matrix and how mature they generally are
Where the big gaps are in the organisation
A  robust  plan  on  what  initiatives  and  activities  to  focus  on in  what sequence to move the company forward. 
ABOUT EXPLORE
EXPLORE is a next generation learning institution on a mission to deliver Digital Skills at scale. It has worked with many Blue Chips, both locally and globally, helping them transform to become more Data-Driven and Insights-led.
Our services include:
BUILDING A PIPELINE OF DATA TALENT FOR YOUR ORGANIZATION 
EXPLORE teaches a range of courses that include Data Science, Data Analytics, Data Engineering and Data Translation where you can sponsor the next generation of digital talent.
UPSKILLING YOUR CURRENT WORKFORCE
We have a range of short and long courses for your workforce so that they are ready to reset their skill-sets and turbo-charge their careers into the Digital Age.
PLACING SCARCE DIGITAL SKILLS INTO YOUR BUSINESS
We have access to a long list of talented skills that we can match to your company’s needs to best set you up for success.
PRODUCTS AND SERVICES
We have some of the best Scientists around who have decades of experience solving problems, both locally and globally. Currently we’re working for Blue Chips in South Africa and across the UK in the Utulities and Financial Services industries.
EXPLORE-DIGITAL.NET